feat: add Cloud Native Days France blog post (#942)
cilium/cilium.io: src/posts/2026-02-25-cloud-native-days-france/index.md

---
path: '/blog/2026/02/25/cloud-native-days-france-2026-cilium'
date: '2026-02-25T12:00:00.000Z'
title: 'Cilium at Cloud Native Days France 2026'
isPopular: true
ogImage: cover.png
ogSummary: 'Cloud Native Days France 2026 recap: Cilium everywhere, CERN keynotes, public sector, and community.'
categories:
  - Community
tags:
  - Cilium
---

import coverImg from './cover.png'
import keynoteImg from './cndf-keynote.png'
import sessionsImg from './cndf-sessions.png'
import communityImg from './cndf-community.png'
import clustermesh1Img from './cndf-cilium-clustermesh1.jpg'
import clustermesh2Img from './cndf-cilium-clustermesh2.jpg'
import clustermesh3Img from './cndf-cilium-clustermesh3.jpg'
import dsr1Img from './cndf-cilium-dsr1.jpg'
import dsr2Img from './cndf-cilium-dsr2.jpg'
import lab1Img from './cndf-lab1.jpg'
import lab2Img from './cndf-lab2.jpg'

![](./cover.png)

Two weeks ago, I attended **Cloud Native Days France 2026** for the very first time — and honestly, it felt like stepping right into the heart of the French (and European) cloud-native ecosystem.

> More than **1,700 people**, **40 partners**, and **50+ talks** gathered at the CENTQUATRE-PARIS for a full day dedicated to Cloud Native, Kubernetes, DevOps, Open Source, and Platform Engineering. What struck me immediately was the energy: no sales pitches, no shiny marketing slides — just real users, real systems, and real production stories.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More than **1,700 people**, **40 partners**, and **50+ talks** gathered at the CENTQUATRE-PARIS for a full day dedicated to Cloud Native, Kubernetes, DevOps, Open Source, and Platform Engineering.
```

Author: A french draft converted to translated and improved by AI!

Reviewer: Not sure I would call it improved :D 

You can hear the AI voice a lot louder than your voice

That diversity really showed throughout the day: some talks were deeply technical, others more human or organizational. But all of them shared one thing — a desire to build sustainable, understandable, and production-grade cloud-native systems.

And a huge shout-out to the volunteers who made the event run so smoothly. Conferences like this don't happen by magic.

## An opening keynote that set the bar very high

The day kicked off with an amazing keynote hosted by Jérôme Petazzoni — co-creator of Docker and one of the early voices who helped shape the modern DevOps movement. For many of us, his work influenced how we think about containers and infrastructure today. He's also an excellent speaker — sharp, funny, and incredibly clear — so having him open the event immediately set the tone: deep technical credibility, zero fluff.

![cndf-keynote.png](cndf-keynote.png)

Then came **Ricardo Rocha**, President of the CNCF Technical Advisory Board and Head of Infrastructure at CERN, with a mind-blowing talk:

**10 PB/s without exploding the budget — how CERN scales its infrastructure with cloud native and AI.**

> With the next upgrade of the LHC (Large Hadron Collider) — the massive particle accelerator at CERN — the amount of data produced by experiments will increase tenfold. We're talking about detectors generating petabytes of data every second. The challenge? The computing budget isn't increasing. In other words: process 10× more data, with the same money.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the next upgrade of the LHC (Large Hadron Collider), the massive particle accelerator at CERN, the amount of data produced by experiments will increase tenfold. We're talking about detectors generating petabytes of data every second, but the computing budget isn't increasing. They need to process 10× more data, with the same money.
```

To make that possible, CERN had to rethink its entire infrastructure — intelligently sharing GPUs and accelerators, supporting both large-scale batch processing and interactive workflows (yes, even SSH), running real-time AI models directly on detectors 100 meters underground, and embedding sustainability and carbon awareness directly into the architecture.

It was one of those talks where you leave thinking: _"If this works at CERN, it probably works for us too."_

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

YouTube link: [Keynote d'ouverture Cloud Native Days France 2026](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lJXUhqHWCDo&list=PLmZ3gFl2Aqt_4_F40zEoUEweEctmtx4p2&index=1&t=5s&pp=iAQB)

> ## Cloud Native in the public sector: open source, for real

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Cloud Native in the public sector
```

YouTube Link: [Formation à l'échelle: 100 000 sessions de labs réseau & sécurité cloud-native](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n_g60hLXZOk&list=PLmZ3gFl2Aqt_4_F40zEoUEweEctmtx4p2&index=32)

<ImageGallery images={[
{ src: lab1Img, alt: '' },
{ src: lab2Img, alt: '' },
]} />

## Hallway track > everything else

Beyond the talks, the real magic happened in the corridors. I randomly met several people running Cilium in production (always a good sign 😉), including [**Noe Charmet**](https://www.linkedin.com/in/charmet/), co-founder and CTO at [Shipfox](https://www.shipfox.io/), who shared how they operate highly optimized GitHub runners at scale. We discussed some of their current challenges and explored whether Tetragon could help — in particular how eBPF-based probes might bring deeper runtime visibility and stronger security signals with minimal overhead (and yes, their booth also had some very cool goodies, which never hurts to break the ice).

> I also crossed paths with [**Edgar Oblette**](https://www.linkedin.com/in/eoblette/), who benchmarked Cilium against Istio in terms of CPU usage and power consumption during his internship at Orange. The world is small — and the cloud-native community even smaller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I also crossed paths with [**Edgar Oblette**](https://www.linkedin.com/in/eoblette/), who benchmarked Cilium against Istio in terms of CPU usage and power consumption during his internship at Orange. The world is small — and the cloud native community even smaller.
```

YouTube Link: [Passons au cloud-native durable](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZNo90IMUQyw&list=PLmZ3gFl2Aqt_4_F40zEoUEweEctmtx4p2&index=37&pp=iAQB)

Together, these sessions reinforced a key theme of the day: modern cloud-native systems must balance performance, cost, security, and sustainability — all at once.

## Communities at the core!

![Communities and conversations at Cloud Native Days France](cndf-community.png)

One of the strongest aspects of Cloud Native Days FR was the density of communities represented and the ease with which conversations started. Throughout the day, I crossed paths with members of [**Merge Forward**](https://community.cncf.io/merge-forward/), [**TechNovations**](https://technovationchallenge.org/fr/) (formerly Women Techmakers), [MongoDB user groups](https://www.meetup.com/pro/mongodb-user-groups/) — including [**Stéphane**](https://www.linkedin.com/in/sestegra/), [**Ahlem**](https://www.linkedin.com/in/ahlem-jaouadi/), and [**Abdul**](https://www.linkedin.com/in/abed-attal/), with whom I had great conversations — as well as CNCF community contributors, all sharing the same curiosity and willingness to learn from each other.

> These informal discussions, sometimes between two talks, sometimes at dedicated booths or while waiting for swag, were a strong reminder that beyond technology, the cloud-native ecosystem is above all a network of people building, sharing, and growing together.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These informal discussions, sometimes between two talks, sometimes at dedicated booths or while waiting for swag, were a strong reminder that beyond technology, the cloud native ecosystem is above all a network of people building, sharing, and growing together.
```
